[THEME MUSIC]
[BEEPING]
>>LISA GARR: With the rising
cost of health care in America,
many are seeking alternatives
such as natural medicine,
acupuncture, and qigong.
Qigong originated
in China, and it
has proven to be an effective
therapy of many ailments.
It has been practiced
for thousands of years
by millions of people worldwide.
Today, joining me is Qigong
Grandmaster, Dame Dr. Effie
Chow.
American presidents, Pope
Pius, and many dignitaries
have honored Effie Chow for her
humanitarian work and ability
to spread the healing message
of qigong around the world.
Thank you so much
for being here.
>>EFFIE CHOW: Thank you
very much for having me.
>>LISA: I am truly honored.
>>CHOW: It's a delight.
>>LISA: You have done
so much for the world.
And we get to explore that
today in terms of even bringing,
through American presidents,
acupuncture into our validity
for insurance,
which is incredible.
You've really, really made such
a big difference in our world.
But if you could,
tell us a little bit
about your background.
As a child, what
sparked your interest?
>>CHOW: I grew up in
the household that
practiced Chinese medicine,
or the friends did.
And we played a very
important emphasis on food
being the healthy
component of our lives.
And also, our attitude and
how we treat one another,
relationships, and everything--
spiritually, emotionally,
physically, we
are conscious about our
interaction with everybody.
And so I actually came
from China as a 3-year-old,
escaping the World
War II as a refugee.
And I didn't realize
how deeply that
was until I started
going through my life
for this museum
that had chosen me
to honor on traditional
Chinese medicine and qigong.
And so I escaped to Canada--
Duncan, a little town near
Vancouver on Vancouver Island.
And I had my schooling there.
I had my nursing in Vancouver,
Vancouver General Hospital,
and also at the University
of British Columbia.
Then I came down to
Stanford as a nurse,
and I worked in research
and was very, very fortunate
in the research department
of the hospital in Stanford
in Palo Alto.
And we were first in the
research, as a nurse,
with Dr. Shumway's mitral valve
operation, a heart operation.
This made history.
And Dr. Kant's
kidney transplant.
That was in the 1960s.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CHOW: And then we
also did morbid obesity,
where we had them feed
on their own self.
And this is really
groundbreaking.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>CHOW: So exciting.
And with that diet, I
introduced a substance called
agar-agar, which is a seaweed.
It's like-- what was it?
A Petri dishes?
And they are still using
it now for dietary things.
That's from 1960.
[LAUGH]
I checked three years ago.
Yes, we are, for certain--
so it was a thrill.
And what else?
It was the first research in
DNA for tuberculosis and cancer.
So you see we're
the cutting edge.
And so here, from
a refugee, and I
get the honor of
being consultant
to the Department of
Health and Human Services
on all aspects in research
for 37 years, and also
then to be invited to be
on the 20-member of Bill
Clinton, President Bill
Clinton's, White House
Commission on Complementary and
Alternative Medicine Policy.
And that's where
great things were
happening, moving the
alternative field, really,
to the fore.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>CHOW: That's what you talked
about-- the acupuncture.
And in that, I helped to write
the California acupuncture
legislation with
Senator Moscone.
I wasn't the only one, but
I was one of the members.
>>LISA: The committee.
>>CHOW: And it is
still in law right now.
>>LISA: Yes, it is.
I have benefited from
that, very much so.
I appreciate that.
Thank you.
Because I've been able to--
>>CHOW: And so that's the policy
and the management end of it.
But it's given me
a great privilege
to be able to practice my own
private practice of the Chow
Integrated Healing
System, or Chow Medical
Qigong, which has healed
where all else have failed.
And it's so heartwarming
to be able to do this
with the help of God and Buddha.
>>LISA: Yes.
I would love to know
how qigong helped
you do all these incredible
things in your life.
You've really
accomplished so much,
and it was through hard
work, and determination,
and understanding
the whole system.
It wasn't a dichotomy in your
life where you had health here
but people weren't
doing great things.
It was always a lot of
integrity in your family, right?
>>CHOW: Absolutely-- the
greatest integrity, and truth,
and honesty.
And going back to those
days, I remember growing up
that people would die early.
And then there was some cases
that my father said to--
my father was a
self-made lawyer,
and he helped a lot of the
Chinese come over from China,
and get established, and
acted as their banker,
and saved their money.
Because when single people
come over, men come over,
and no language of
the sort, they're
open to gamble and to drinking.
>>LISA: And get
taken advantage of.
>>CHOW: And taken advantage of.
My dad helped them.
And we didn't find out that he
helped them stay at our place
free until they got
settled, had a job.
And then we had somebody
else come into our house.
And I said, how come
we have so many--
he says, well, they're all
cousins, when we asked.
I said, how come we have so many
cousins for years and years?
And he said, well, we
must help our cousins.
And in Chinese,
everybody is our cousin.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm, yes.
>>CHOW: Right?
>>LISA: I see you were
taught that at an early age.
>>CHOW: We were taught early.
And we witnessed-- particularly
this one case I'll give
as an example, but
example of many--
that Mr. Wong had no
diagnosis, but he was dying.
And they said, he's
eminently dying.
So my father said, well,
can we use our medicine?
That means our Chinese
medicine-- qigong, tai chi,
acupuncture, moxa, and cupping,
and herbs, and diet, and all
that.
So we got the carte blanche.
So we had a whole
group of friends
who did different things, and
he lived for another 15 years.
And I was just
going into nursing,
and I was exposed to what
I chose as my life work.
And I was see the
revolving door concept--
they come in, they go out
not quite well, come back in,
they go out, and then
they end up dying early.
>>LISA: In the Western
medicine system.
>>CHOW: In the Western medicine.
So as a nurse, I witnessed
this at Stanford,
at a lot of the UC.
>>LISA: Yet, at the
same time, there
was groundbreaking
work being done.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
>>LISA: It was a little
bit of both, right?
>>CHOW: Exactly, yes.
But you have to
integrate it, otherwise,
you'll be pulled with the schism
and the chaoticness of it.
And so pick a hero and
see, who's your hero?
And it's not an unfriendly
competition, but a striving,
a hero you strive to be--
>>LISA: A mentor.
>>CHOW: --and even better.
So in my students, if
I teach my students,
and they become
better than I am,
I don't keep secrets from them.
And I know a lot of
teachers keep secrets
so that they're the best.
>>LISA: I've heard that, yes.
>>CHOW: Yes.
And I give them all of the info.
The first day,
they're doing things
that the other teachers would
say, well, you don't do this
until two and three years.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>CHOW: And so for
me, my philosophy
is, if you are better
than me, then I've
been the best teacher.
>>LISA: That's a
wonderful philosophy.
>>CHOW: Yeah, that
has been so true.
>>LISA: I really would love
to see you move the energy
and do qigong, so we're going
to watch a demonstration here
of Dr. Effie Chow doing qigong.
OK, so we are in
the Gaia Studio here
with Effie Chow and the
director of "Inspirations," Doug
Moldawsky.
I'm very happy to
have them both here.
So Doug is going to do a little
bit of an energy demonstration
with Effie, and Effie's
going to lead him through it.
So let's see.
Show us how energy flows.
>>CHOW: All right.
Now before we do
the exercises, I
want to explain the
use of the energy
and how one can enhance it.
And so in this way,
Doug, I'm going
to demonstrate how
you can lift me up.
There, put your
arms under my ribs.
>>DOUG MOLDAWSKY:
Under the ribs.
>>CHOW: Yes, and don't
crush my ribs, OK?
>>MOLDAWSKY: OK.
>>CHOW: And just lift me
up, turn me right around,
and put me right back here.
>>MOLDAWSKY: OK, here we go.
>>CHOW: And we'll see
whether you can do it or not.
OK.
Oh, wow.
[LAUGH]
OK.
Thank you.
Was that easy?
>>MOLDAWSKY: Yeah, no.
It was easy, yes.
>>CHOW: Now just
stay right there.
>>MOLDAWSKY: OK.
>>CHOW: Now I'm going
to do a qigong maneuver.
And now I want you to
do the same thing, OK?
>>MOLDAWSKY: OK.
>>CHOW: The same
thing as what you did.
And so put your arm around.
And I'm going to put my hand
on his wrist, as I did before.
So I'm giving you
details so that you
can practice, but be sure
not to crush a person's rib.
It isn't a crushing exercise.
And so let's show what we
can do with the energy.
When I say go, you try
to lift me, all right?
>>MOLDAWSKY: OK.
>>CHOW: [BREATHING SOUNDS]
OK, go.
Now is there a difference?
>>MOLDAWSKY: Um, yeah,
you weigh 400 pounds now.
>>CHOW: Yeah.
OK, that's what I
was demonstrating,
that you can work the qi so
that you get more qi, and so not
only from the exercise, that
if you go work with a cancer
patient, or you work
with any other patients,
that you can accelerate
your qi so that you're more
effective and more powerful.
In this case, I have
increased, and I rooted myself
to the ground.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
Incredible.
Gosh, good job.
And Doug is a very strong guy.
Thank you so much.
>>CHOW: You're welcome.
>>LISA: Thank you very much.
>>CHOW: Do you want to say the
difference you felt at all?
>>MOLDAWSKY: The
difference was that it just
felt like you were
rooted to the ground.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
And this is what I did.
Remember, I did this?
The qi?
And so my mind is exponentially
increasing the power of the qi,
and then I am moving it
down into the ground.
>>LISA: Wow.
It is fascinating to see how
we can literally root ourselves
to the ground by focusing
our mind with this practice.
Can you tell me how the
principles of qigong
have worked in your life
and how you use that
as the basis for everything
that you do teach?
Teach us a little about qigong.
>>CHOW: Well, you
know something?
I've had a very
diversified life.
It's the energy
that I live, and I
have to trust in my
intuition, and what I do
and what I don't do, and your
relationship to individuals
are extremely important.
So for example,
meeting strangers,
you need to be able to assess
from an energetic standpoint
whether they're trustworthy,
whether they can become
really good friends or not.
And also in working with a
client, a patient, a client,
you need to be intuitive.
It isn't just what
you learn in school--
that this is the
diagnosis-- but you
need to be intuitive to
the individual as to what
their needs are.
And it must always be spiritual,
emotional, and then physical.
Because when you have
physical manifestation,
they are signs and
symptoms of disruption
with a spiritual and
emotional balance.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: And that's
what Western medicine
labels that as something--
physical manifestations.
>>LISA: Right, so
they break it up.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: And you-- spiritual,
emotional, physical
are all the same thing, which
is basically what qigong is.
And you were
explaining this to me,
about how when you do
qigong, you move the world.
Can you tell us about that?
>>CHOW: Oh, yes.
Well, that's part of your
being with the world.
And in Taoism, in Chinese
medicine, and also qigong,
it's the basis of
Chinese medicine,
the balance of this energy.
And so a lot of people
saying that, oh, qigong, oh,
that's another exercise
and meditation.
It isn't.
It is your connection
with the universe.
with the life force.
So it isn't just
moving like this, OK?
So even the movement--
moving like this looks good.
But if you move like
this, and your focus
is into the universe, and
your movement of the hand
is moving the whole universe.
And so when you work
with the individual,
you're also moving
the individual,
the manifestation of the qi.
You don't just,
oh, OK, you know?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>CHOW: So it takes your
whole mind, body, and spirit
to integrate with
the individual.
And in qi, we're talking
about we are all energy,
and so we are connected to
everything in the universe.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: And this is energy.
This is alive.
In the Western sense, they
said this is inanimate
and this is animate.
No.
Everything is animate.
And so therefore, you
have to relate to it.
And not just bugs, and
animals, and human being--
everything is.
Because if you didn't have
oxygen, what would this be?
It would crumble to dust.
>>LISA: Wouldn't be there.
Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: Yes, that's right.
So we're related to everything,
and we need to understand that.
>>LISA: When you see
someone who is ill,
who is in some way suffering,
do you see that person as whole
when you are working with them?
Do you bring their energy
back together again?
How do you do that?
>>CHOW: That's a great question.
Absolutely.
In Western medicine,
we have our downfall
now because we look at a part.
Oh, kidney.
So we deal with the kidney.
Or you have a
gallbladder problem.
Well, you deal with the
gallbladder or whatever else.
And this is a failure that is
happening with Western medicine
because you cannot
isolate things together.
It's like quantum physics,
talking about the connection
of everything.
And that when you
look at a body,
it's all collection
to smaller particles.
Then you look at the smaller
particle, its connection
with smaller, until it's
ad infinitum, that it
is all connections.
And Fritjof Capra has
written two good books.
"The Tao of Physics," and
that was way back in 1970s,
and it's still very
apropos theory.
And the next one is--
what is it?
"The Turn Around" or
something like that.
>>LISA: "The Turn Around"?
But "The Tao of Physics" has to
do with the physics as a whole.
>>CHOW: Yes, the
quantum physics relating
with the Taoist physics.
And so therefore, what
it is is that qigong
is the basis of traditional
Chinese medicine.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: It's a basic theory.
The balance of this life force
is what gives you dis-ease,
or then moving
into disease if you
don't have the skill to deal
with the initial dis-ease.
>>LISA: Dis-ease.
Now you mentioned
that you were a chef.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: And so food
is a part of this.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
>>LISA: And as you said,
food is our medicine.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
>>LISA: And I think that I
read a quote from you that
said, "When you eat
food with appreciation,
it becomes fuel for your body.
But if you eat it
hastily, it becomes fat."
>>CHOW: Yeah.
In other words, if you eat
it with a spiritual sense,
then it becomes energy.
And if you just eat
it without concern
about what you're eating,
even if you eat good food,
it turns into fat, more
likely, instead of energy.
>>LISA: So when you eat,
you appreciate your food.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: You stop, which
a lot of us don't do.
>>CHOW: We just engorge
ourselves until we,
oh, I can't stand it anymore.
Yes.
So we have to know.
And that's with
everything, not just food,
but your physical activity.
In the West, we strive to do
this and do this until we drop.
And we need to not do that.
And this is why the
qigong is soft and gentle,
but it's very powerful,
more powerful than just
struggling and doing this
running, and the weights,
and all that.
And Dr. Shin Lin, who
is with UC Irvine,
researched fast-moving qigong
versus slow-moving qigong.
And in tai chi, they have this.
They have--
[SHOUTING]
But then there's a tai chi
movement that is very smooth.
I used to teach
tai chi, but I have
my own system now of qigong,
the Chow Qigong System.
And so his measurement
through Western science
found that the slow-moving
qi is much more powerful.
>>LISA: Really?
>>CHOW: Well, why?
The logic is you have to
concentrate a whole lot more
to move with a qi.
You move like this, it doesn't
take much concentration.
>>LISA: Disperses the energy.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
Yeah.
Then the other thing is, with
our movement, for example,
we move like this, and
we pause and stretch.
And at that point when you're
stopped, the qi rises up.
So it's totally different
from what Western concept is.
>>LISA: You're pushing down.
>>CHOW: Well, whatever.
You can do this--
>>LISA: Well, yoga
has a lot of--
>>CHOW: --and move
the qi from the heart
and increase the circulation.
>>LISA: But yoga
does that as well.
It expands.
It moves energy as well.
>>CHOW: Mm-hmm.
I want to caution
the people who's
listening and
other people, and I
caution my students--
don't mix systems.
The Ayurveda has the chakras.
Chinese, we don't
have the chakras.
We have the meridian system.
We have definite points
that's similar to the yoga,
but we have our own system.
If you begin mixing systems
before you even know it well,
then you are voiding out
or even creating chaos.
>>LISA: So it's important
to know them both very well,
the chakra system,
the meridian system.
>>CHOW: Well, if you're going
to be talking about chakras.
You don't have to
know both systems,
but do go systematically
and in-depth.
Otherwise, you're just
taking a little bit here,
a little bit there, and
you ain't got nothing.
[LAUGHING]
>>LISA: You created your own
system at the East West Center.
Can you tell us about--
>>CHOW: East West
Academy of Healing Arts
is my non-profit
organization, set up
in San Francisco
in 1973, so we've
been in business a long time.
And what it is, is that I have
set up a system after I've
taken 12 different systems.
I didn't just take it a little
bit and add them all together.
I found out what was good in
this system, what was better
in this system, and I took
the best from the system
to create the Chow Integrated
Healing System, or CIHS, slash,
Chow Medical Qigong, CMQ.
But I didn't just take it, and
I said, oh, that's good, OK,
and I take a little bit.
I took the depth of the system.
And then I saw what was good
and what was not as strong.
And so I took the
powerful elements together
to create my system.
And I think many
people are doing that.
The only caution
is a lot of people
are doing it without
having studied in-depth
these systems that they take.
They take a little bit.
And that's dangerous.
>>LISA: I am really
glad that you said that.
And it takes years, decades, to
really integrate these systems
and to really study
them in-depth.
>>CHOW: Well, I don't know about
saying it always takes years.
It depends on the individual.
If they concentrate and say,
this three months, everything
is yoga.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>CHOW: And I'm
going to concentrate.
But mostly dabble, dabble,
dabble, so it takes years.
But we shouldn't relegate
ourselves to time space.
It depends on your diligence
and your commitment.
>>LISA: OK, I understand.
>>CHOW: OK.
And so I want people
to understand that.
It's not the time.
It is your diligence,
and your commitment,
and your desire to learn
in-depth the system.
And I say to them, dedicate
yourself three months
to six months to really
dedicate to that system,
and you take whatever it is.
Then you look at another system.
Unless you have
the time and frame
that you can take this system
and be able to separate them,
and at the same time, take
this system, but don't mix it.
Do you understand what
I'm talking about?
>>LISA: I understand perfectly.
I understand perfectly.
Now you have an incredible
amount of energy
to create wonderful
things in the world.
You've created World Tai
Chi Day, World Tai Chi Day.
>>CHOW: Along with Bill.
Actually, Bill Douglas did
that with his wife, Angie.
And we've been partners
for a long time.
Every year.
>>LISA: Tell me what that is.
>>CHOW: Well, it's dedicated
one day out of the year--
the last Saturday in April--
and he uses electronic
media to get people
in every country participating
on that day from 10 o'clock.
So from New Zealand through
the time span, it starts.
And so that in 24 hours,
you're enhancing qi.
It starts in New Zealand,
then the next time frame, then
the next time frame.
>>LISA: And people have
events in their cities.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
>>LISA: That's wonderful.
>>CHOW: And so it's 80 countries
that it reaches, live stream,
and we're part of that,
in number of cities.
Now we work in concert with
him with the World Congress
on qigong, tai chi, TCM,
traditional Chinese medicine,
and natural healing.
That expands it
more than qigong.
>>LISA: Ah, I see.
>>CHOW: And so we
have that once a year.
We're in our 19th year.
>>LISA: Whoa.
>>CHOW: And the 20th is
going to be in Japan.
>>LISA: Oh, fantastic.
>>CHOW: Yeah.
And so they bid to have it.
And last year, we
had it in Italy.
And so the purpose of that
is to bring them together.
As you know, as in
acupuncture, I've
been very much involved
with the politics,
and I have helped move it.
That's why they call me the
Qigong Mother of the West.
>>LISA: Oh that
makes perfect sense.
We actually have a
video here of qigong
and tai chi being demonstrated
on World Tai Chi Day.
Take a look.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> AsianWeek Foundation
should be applauded
for your leadership and for
bringing us now this 10th
Annual Asian Heritage
Food Festival.
We're so indebted to you.
Congratulations.
[APPLAUSE]
>>CHOW: We organized 350
people to come and perform.
And we want to thank
Teddy Fang very
much for this privilege of
being part of the Asian Heritage
Street Celebration with the
natural medicine, medicine
without drugs.
It is a first in the
history of San Francisco
to have this
performance, and it'll
be the first of
annual activities.
And we will have this
filled out next year.
[SHOUTING]
>>LISA: So can you
explain a little bit
further of what qigong is?
What are they doing?
What is happening?
>>CHOW: It is a basis of
traditional Chinese medicine
theory, the balance
of the energy,
of the qi, the vital life force.
The qi is breath.
It's that simple, but
yet, that complex.
So the qi is breath.
And so that means oxygen, right?
And you have to breathe
to get oxygen. So you
have to learn how to breathe
with your diaphragm, not--
[GASP] --this.
>>LISA: Right.
>>CHOW: And so you have to
learn proper breathing-- there's
different ways of breathing--
so that you maximize
the oxygenation in your body.
So maximizing oxygen will get
your blood circulation moving,
and your heart will
function better.
And then when you get
circulation going,
the blood is what brings
oxygen to the cells.
So I use 300 trillion cells.
When I went to school,
it was 60 trillion.
And then science said
it's 600 trillion
because of the sophistication
of instrumentation and testing.
>>LISA: That's a great image.
>>CHOW: So I use half of that.
300 trillion babies
in your body.
And this is what I teach people.
You have to feed them.
You have to cajole them.
You have to teach them.
>>LISA: To move them.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
And move them and all that.
So qigong is really
a way of life.
It isn't just an
exercise and meditation.
And so therefore, "qi"
is breath or oxygen.
"Gong" means cultivation,
or manifestation,
or how to use it to
the greatest advantage.
>>LISA: I can
understand how this
would work with health,
because most disease is
caused by stuck energy, right?
>>CHOW: Yes, and therefore,
lacking in oxygen.
And the newest
therapies right now--
just using cancer
as an example--
is that they are injecting
oxygen into the cancer cells.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: Wouldn't you
think they would grow?
>>CHOW: Well, it kills them.
>>LISA: It kills them?
>>CHOW: Oxygen kills cancer.
And the disease don't like
oxygen, but they love sugar,
they love carbohydrates,
and they love no oxygen. Now
one of the newest
therapies is injecting--
because chemotherapy, it kills
good cells as well, even more
readily than the cancer cells.
And so you get all
the side effects--
horrendous.
And many people die
from side effects.
And this is what,
using qigong, we
have prevented side effects
from chemotherapy and radiation.
But first of all, we're
talking about the oxygen.
You inject it in, and you
don't get any side effect.
Now Germany is more premiere in
having this readily available.
In the United States,
it's very hard to find.
>>LISA: And you still do it.
>>CHOW: Yes, we can still do it.
And then the other new
one is a stem cell,
where you have cells
that are neutral,
and it's designated
to where you need it.
Now in qigong, I equate
that to the empty force.
We have, always,
energy around us
that is not delegated,
relegated to a certain function.
>>LISA: Explain that.
What do you mean?
>>CHOW: Well, it's
neutral force.
And it is for you to be able
to practice qigong so that you
know how to utilize this.
And I demonstrate it in the
push, and the lift, and all
that, how we utilize that.
>>LISA: So this outside
force is where--
>>CHOW: We call it
the empty force.
>>LISA: The empty force.
>>CHOW: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: And you
utilize that force
when you lift people,
or push grown men over.
>>CHOW: Well, heal people.
But I use this for demonstration
because people like
to see something happening.
But that doesn't stop there.
So let's say, for six people,
and I can't push them.
I just confronted them.
And then using the qi,
and feeling their qi,
and building up my own
breath and my qigong,
then I'm able to push
them across the stage.
>>LISA: We actually
have a video of this.
I want you to check this out.
Take a look at little
5 foot 2" Effie Chow
pushing a group of five people.
>>CHOW: So it's not fighting.
I'm not fighting, I'm just
demonstrating the empty force
that can be escalated.
All right.
Paul, right?
>> Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: OK.
I'm going to try and push them.
[GRUNTING]
I'm trying to push
them, and any success?
>> No.
>>CHOW: So how many of you
live your life this way?
[LAUGHTER]
Now you push, and
you confront, and you
deal with all your might,
and you can't get anywhere.
Not all the time, some time.
But we do, we go at it without
thinking, without feeling.
So now we use the qi.
And so just stay.
Remember, no fighting.
>> All right.
>>CHOW: If you feel
something, go with it.
And if not, just stay.
And-- [SHARP BREATH] You ready?
OK.
[SHARP BREATH]
>> Whoa!
>>CHOW: Move!
>> OK, OK.
>>CHOW: Move, move, move.
OK?
You're going to fall
and break your head.
So when you feel
something, move.
Move your legs, you understand?
So this is the key to healing.
You feel the force,
move with it.
[APPLAUSE]
Yay!
I've worked up to eight people.
>>LISA: Eight people?
>>CHOW: Yes.
[LAUGHING]
>>LISA: That's amazing.
>>CHOW: And so that proves that
you can manifest a powerful qi.
And this exercise is only
demonstrating what can happen.
But when you get working with
people, a person with cancer,
and you manifest this force,
it deals with the disease.
>>LISA: In what way?
How could you deal with the
cancer cells using qigong?
>>CHOW: Qigong is to
improve the health.
>>LISA: OK.
>>CHOW: Right?
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: And so therefore,
you improve the health
of the total individual.
You improve the health
of the good cells
so that they're able to
conquer the bad cells.
Or you give the oxygen to the
bad cells, the cancer cells,
it kills them.
So we're the oldest
oxygen therapy--
>>LISA: I guess so.
>>CHOW: --ever in the world.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
And you don't need
the injection.
You just do it
through the breath.
>>CHOW: That's right.
>>LISA: Now can somebody do
this also if they have anxiety,
or they have depression?
>>CHOW: Oh, absolutely.
>>LISA: How can
you use the breath
for the emotional issues?
>>CHOW: Well, it
isn't just breath.
For example, I teach people
to feel, sense where it is.
And I teach people how to brush
away the energy if they have
too much, or pack in the energy
if they don't have enough,
if they're insufficient,
or the excess.
And also, I use
the meridian system
to open up the meridian system.
And so I give them a toolbox
that they can use every day.
Simple tool box,
but it's so complex.
I present it to them
simply because I
went through many, many years of
research to come to my system.
And so therefore, we give them
a tool box so they can practice,
and they get the results.
So it changes
cellular structure,
absolute cellular structure.
>>LISA: Is this
something that they're
studying in the research labs?
>>CHOW: Oh, yes.
Oh, yes.
There's lots of data
on this right now.
>>LISA: It changes
cellular structure.
>>CHOW: Yeah.
And not only that, but
your whole energetics.
And it helps you
become more calm.
If you're depressed, it's
because you feel unsteady,
and your anxiety, all of that.
So it's emotional, spiritual,
and physical that we deal with.
>>LISA: Now you,
particularly, had an issue
recently with your health.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: Can we talk about?
Is this OK?
>>CHOW: Yeah.
I hope I can be an influence
and an inspiration to people.
I'm not 29 years old.
[LAUGH]
>>LISA: Your ageless.
Yes.
>>CHOW: Whereas I skied
down the mountain,
and competed and
all that at dance
competitions, and
everything like that,
but that experience helped
me to deal with this.
I was in for infection,
and within three days,
I was cleared.
However, they
didn't give me food.
They just fed me
by IV and wouldn't
let me move in fear that
I might have fibrillation,
which I'm clear I don't have,
in fear of my cholesterol level,
in fear of high blood
pressure, which all is normal.
My pulse is alright--
Everything was normal.
But they kept me.
And I understand medicine
because I'm a nurse,
and this is why I worked at
integrating the food system.
And so they put me on three
series of drugs, of six drugs
in each batch,
three antibiotics.
And I was cleared
of any infection,
but they wanted to give me.
And I had terrible
reaction from it.
And I kept getting
worse and worse.
After the third set, when I
complained of side reaction,
they would change it to this.
And then I would have
further side reaction.
And then, by the third day, I
had to write a letter and say,
if you do not take me
off this medication--
because I'm coming to--
I was bedbound, I couldn't move,
and my mind was really warped.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: And so I wrote
a letter and said,
if you don't take me
off the medication,
I will die in seven days from
my process that I've been down.
And I had a pharmacist,
herbalist, and acupuncturist--
she's one of the best.
She did an analysis
of all the drugs
and found that, indeed,
each one of them
was sort of like a
10-ton truck run me over.
>>LISA: Oof.
>>CHOW: Made me very weak.
>>LISA: Your body was
just not going to--
>>CHOW: Just really weak.
So I have nothing.
So they did after
I wrote that note.
And so they didn't give me any
rehab because I was elderly.
And so I used Chow Integrated
Healing System, my Chow Medical
Qigong, to help me move through.
Otherwise, I would have
been dead at this time.
>>LISA: How long ago was this?
>>CHOW: This was
about three years ago.
And so I'm improving,
and so I'm beginning now
to walk by myself,
just beginning,
from totally wheelchair-bound.
And I had so much pain that
people come two feet from me,
I said, ow, just
stay right there.
>>LISA: You could feel their--
>>CHOW: I could feel the
discombobulation of the energy,
that was how bad I was.
And many people would have
died, just given up and died.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>CHOW: My thought is, no,
I have too much passion
in this life.
>>LISA: Too much to do.
>>CHOW: That's right.
Well, I had a
near-death experience.
And I was sent back here with
a message from God and Buddha,
that we gave you a
wonderful system,
but you haven't been
teaching people.
You've been creating miracles.
You need to train a whole team
to take over because you cannot
come back to heaven
until you help.
That's a really heavy--
>>LISA: Lesson.
>>CHOW: --heavy mission
that I have to do.
But I'm so excited.
I am training a lot of people.
>>LISA: So you're
training other people
how to do this, using
this integrated system.
>>CHOW: Yes, that's
right, my system.
Yes, the integrated system.
>>LISA: How many
different modalities
are within your system?
Could you guess?
>>CHOW: Well, as
I had mentioned,
it encompasses a lot because
we're talking about the mind.
And I never do hands-on
until I talk to them.
What's happening in your life?
And I just had a couple
from Japan this last week,
and the woman, a
wife, had ringing
in the ears for three years,
and nothing could help it.
And her husband had injured his
right arm-- he's a contractor--
and couldn't do anything.
He had a brace, full brace, and
he couldn't use it or anything.
So I spent an hour, hour
and a half, talking.
And remember, two of them I
have to talk to them about.
And by the time we finished,
in two hours, I said,
how is your ringing in the ear?
And she said, oh my gosh.
She said, it's at
least 50% gone.
>>LISA: This is just through
talking about their life,
what's bothering them.
>>CHOW: Well, and I have
a way of illiciting.
It isn't just chatting
about, oh, you do this.
But I have a certain
direction I want them to see,
and relate to how
they feel and what
their situation is at the time.
And then I said, how's your arm?
And he said, I can move it.
There's no pain.
And then we took his braces off.
And then I worked about
20 minutes on each of them
with the directed
work with the qi.
>>LISA: Can you talk
with us about how
we could use qigong
for anti-aging,
or how you feel about that?
>>CHOW: Oh my gosh.
It's what the masses
feel about it.
They're so scared about
anti-aging, about aging.
>>LISA: Aging, yes.
>>CHOW: And when it
doesn't need to be that.
And the Chinese revere age.
And I think because the West,
they feel, oh, the aging.
They revere young, and
beautiful, and strong.
>>LISA: All around the world.
>>CHOW: --beauty and all that.
They're paying
attention-- I'm not
saying they're not-- they're
putting lots of money
into setting up these beautiful
Hilton Hotel, Marriott Hotel
type of set, but
they really don't
have anything for promoting
health programs in there.
They have a few dances
and this or that.
>>LISA: They take care of
the elderly, but not to help.
>>CHOW: And also,
they offer bingo,
they offer bridge,
offer those things.
But they should be offering
health-giving sessions
like qigong.
I volunteered to go back to
where I was to give qigong.
And we've helped
people walk better.
And we've helped people
gain better balance
and also to be able
to brush pain away.
And right now, I'm in the midst
of setting up a senior team
to go internationally,
or at least
locally, with me
to different places
and to be able to teach
others how to do it.
>>LISA: You just said
"brush away pain."
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: Can you teach
us that right now?
[LAUGH]
Please?
>>CHOW: Well, first, you
have to learn how to breathe.
>>LISA: OK.
>>CHOW: And the breath
is from the diaphragm.
It's from the xiphoid,
where the breastbone is,
and to your belly
button, that part.
And then the floating ribs right
here, it's that space there
people usually breathe.
[BREATH]
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>CHOW: So they create
tension already.
Slow it down.
Keep your shoulders
back and smooth.
And then close your lip.
And then move the diaphragm
out, move it way out, way out,
and you hit it.
Is it hard, or is it soft?
And now move it in
like an accordion.
And the air comes out
through your teeth.
All right.
[EXHALING]
That's right.
Not-- [BLOWING] If you blow
a candle, there's no power.
[HISSING] You're
forcing qi to circulate.
[HISSING]
>>LISA: Through your whole body.
>>CHOW: Moving that in, yes.
Mm-hmm, OK.
So it takes time,
some time, depends
on how diligent you are.
>>LISA: I'm new at this.
>>CHOW: Yeah.
So do you feel anything?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>CHOW: Even just once, twice.
And what I did last
night, I had a client,
and she had some
respiratory problems.
And she was "pan," a little
bit fat, fairly much fat.
And so we did this six times,
and her belly got hard.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CHOW: It was flabby,
and her belly got hard.
And also, then after one hour--
and I teach people how to do it.
I taught her son
to work with it.
And so I actually
literally push against
while you're breathing,
and then push me out,
so build the strength of the
thing with someone pushing you.
And so you develop
this power diaphragm.
>>LISA: Strong diaphragm.
Mm-hmm.
>>CHOW: Yeah, the abs, right?
>>LISA: Fantastic.
>>CHOW: And that's what she did.
Wow, it's tight.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>CHOW: Before, it was flabby.
>>LISA: There's muscles there.
>>CHOW: Her husband was
there, so I was teaching them.
Always family, work with family.
And so I have fun doing this.
>>LISA: It looks
like you have fun.
>>CHOW: Because we have results
that no one else is getting.
>>LISA: Well, you clearly
have a mission to do this.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: And you
mentioned that you
had affected the US president,
the ability to have insurance
cover acupuncture.
>>CHOW: Well, it was a fallout.
It wasn't exactly that, but
because we had the commission.
We had, throughout the
United States, and in Canada,
and other countries,
that most of them,
not everyone, most of
the medical schools
incorporate an integrative
medicine, or energy medicine,
or holistic medicine, whether
it's a class or a division.
>>LISA: Right.
>>CHOW: I had started
that, and then that
was the beginning of
the reimbursement order.
And I worked with the senators.
I go up to Sacramento and say,
OK, I've got two hours here,
then I got to go back down to
San Francisco and go to jail,
because they were jailing
the acupuncturists,
and I was helping the
acupuncturists get out of jail.
>>LISA: This is why you
created this measure?
>>CHOW: They were blamed that
they were practicing medicine
without a license.
And they got a smart lawyer--
Italian lawyer, not
a Chinese lawyer.
He said, they weren't
claiming to practice medicine
with a license.
They were practicing
acupuncture.
So they got the case
thrown out of court.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CHOW: The acupuncturists,
two of them.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>CHOW: And then a well-known
homeopathist, he got arrested.
And remember, all this,
I was, at the same time,
writing legislation
with the legislators,
having to go from Sacramento.
Oh, I just came from the jail.
I've got to go down to the jail.
It was like "Pirates of
Penzance" or something.
It was so fantastic.
And then the homeopathist also
got arrested, put into jail.
And they used the same
argument that they're
practicing homeopathy.
>>LISA: So you've
affected policy,
and you've helped us get
insurance to cover acupuncture
and so forth, how can--
>>CHOW: Not as much
as we need to do.
>>LISA: That's what I want
to ask you is, how can we
affect health care?
How can we make a difference?
>>CHOW: Well, the
power of the people
is more powerful than the
power of the practitioners.
>>LISA: Well-said.
>>CHOW: Because if
we want legislation,
and it talks about
finance, of course,
we want finances, et cetera.
But the people is that
they want service so
that it can be taken care of.
Right now, insurance only
covers medicine and surgery.
>>LISA: True.
>>CHOW: Basically.
>>LISA: Yes, it doesn't
cover alternative.
>>CHOW: There's a little
bit here and there,
like the acupuncture.
They only give you so many
treatments a year, and also
very little.
So they give the wrong idea.
You have this belief
that we should
be able to cure what we
couldn't cure for $100,000,
and you should be able to cure
for a few hundred dollars--
>>LISA: For a
couple of sessions.
>>CHOW: --and for
a few sessions.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
So in a few hours, we really
can't accomplish much.
Is there a way that we can
get insurance companies
to cover alternative therapies?
It could be massage.
It could be qigong.
It could be tai chi.
It could be any types of these
incredible therapies that move
the circulation in the body.
>>CHOW: Well, you just
brought up a subject
that I am very much
involved with right now.
Because coming back from
my near-death experience,
that was one thing that
I was also primed to do.
There's a medical
system, and there's
all the other traditions, but
it's so hectic and chaotic.
So that's what I am now,
with several groups, working
at developing all
the alternatives
into a structural
system so it has power.
>>LISA: Hmm, explain.
What would that look like?
>>CHOW: Well, it would be
like the medical system,
except dealing with all
these other methods.
>>LISA: As an entity.
>>CHOW: As an entity,
as solid structure.
And we have to write up
the tasks, and mission,
and all that, and
identify what it is.
And we have several groups that
are very excited and involved.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>CHOW: And so then when
we have that structure,
then we can build an insurance--
I don't want to
call it insurance--
just reimbursement system.
Because insurance has
a bad name, in a way.
>>LISA: That is a great point.
No, that's terrific.
So as the medical system
has the Heart Association,
it has endocrinology,
it has pediatrics,
you would take
this, and you would
use tai chi, or the
Chinese medicine
system, and Ayurvedic system--
>>CHOW: Ayurveda, and Latino,
and Indians, and so forth.
>>LISA: African, whatever.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
>>LISA: And use all of
these into a system.
>>CHOW: All of these into a
system to get them organized.
And then they have a structure
to really have a speech
that they can be heard.
So we need funding.
We need people like
you, more publicity,
so more people will
know that we're
trying to develop this
to benefit the people,
so that they can get reimbursed
for practicing wellness classes
and therapy.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>CHOW: Wouldn't
that be wonderful?
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>CHOW: And that's
like in China.
In the old day of China,
they paid for their doctor
if they kept them well.
But if they failed,
and they get sick,
then they don't pay the doctor.
In other words, they get
rid of the doctor too
and get another doctor
to keep them well.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
It makes sense.
Doctors still need
to make a living.
>>CHOW: Of course.
>>LISA: Because they
are really good people.
My father's a doctor.
>>CHOW: Oh, sure, yes.
And I'm a nurse.
I'm part of the medical system.
>>LISA: But you have these
different perspectives.
>>CHOW: It's just I
see the inequities.
And also, the danger of
complementary alternative
medicine is what I
said, that people
will take little
bits here and there,
and then they go into practice.
And so that's what
we're looking at too,
is standards of practice.
>>LISA: Yeah, that makes sense.
>>CHOW: And then, of
course, every practice
will have their own
standard of practice,
but we need to
make sure that they
have a standard of practice.
>>LISA: That is important.
>>CHOW: And it's
ethical and courtesy.
>>LISA: That's nice.
And having teams work on people.
>>CHOW: Exactly.
>>LISA: Because it's
not just one modality.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: Alternative and
integrative medicine,
I believe, has always been
the way of the future,
and you have been
such a pioneer to help
us understand that in the West.
Thank you.
>>CHOW: Thank you.
I love being a pioneer.
>>LISA: You are.
You are an amazing pioneer.
I just need to ask
you, on that level,
what is your biggest reason,
your biggest why, why
you do everything you do?
>>CHOW: That's hard to
pinpoint because life
is such a broad issue.
And I suppose my answer is
that I have had a good life.
Even with the
challenges, I've always
been taught that there's
something good that
can come out of this.
So in other words,
our bad experiences
are learning experiences for
the people who are positive,
and they will get
benefits from it.
But if someone is
negative, they'll see this,
and they'll go down,
and down, and down.
It has turned out
this way unendingly.
And so I concentrate on
the beauty of my life
that has been.
And also, what
practicing qigong has
been able to do for me,
to be a prowess in sports,
in dance, and in love
and relationships.
And so I like to share
this with the people who
feel so hopeless.
And unfortunately, today,
there are so many people
feeling hopeless.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>CHOW: And I like to put out
one prescription, my signature
prescription, is
that we need eight
hugs, heart-to-heart
hugs, every day, and more.
And we need three belly-aching
laughs a day at least.
And really not just
ha ha, but, ha!
Ha!
Like Santa Claus, you know?
Because that stokes
up the heart.
Laughter is the
sound of the heart.
So you don't need
a joke or anything.
It's to exercise your heart.
And your circulation will
distribute oxygen to your cells
and help your mind as well.
Alzheimer and dementia
is big, and that's
because they're not
getting enough oxygen.
>>LISA: Oxygen, laughter, hugs.
>>CHOW: Yes.
>>LISA: I love it.
>>CHOW: And joy.
>>LISA: And joy.
>>CHOW: Peace, peace,
and all of that.
And this is what
I hope to bring--
>>LISA: And you do.
>>CHOW: --for the
rest of my life.
>>LISA: Well, thank you so much
for being such an inspiration.
>>CHOW: Well, I want to thank
you, because you folks at Gaia
have been the inspiration,
as this program is called,
"Inspiration," that you've been
an inspiration to where others
have not been able to reach.
And I'd love to be a
partner with you people.
>>LISA: Yes, bring it on.
Yes, absolutely.
Thank you so much for
spreading the message of qigong
around the world and showing
us what it means to really have
the ability to heal ourselves.
That's so important.
And thank you so
much for watching.
If you would like to watch
more inspirational programming,
please check out
"Inspirations" on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr, and
until next time,
I invite you to stay aware.
[THEME MUSIC]